in today's spectral video we're going to
demonstrate how to unblock a cat that
has feline urethral obstruction this is
a common emergency that you're going to
see in general practice or even an
emergency and it's important to be able
to know how to unblock a cat eight
dramatically and quickly the first
important thing is to remember to be set
up make sure you have the IV catheter
placed you've started a cat on IV fluids
you have sterile gloves ready sterile
lubrication multiple types of urinary
catheters including open or closed and
Tomcats slippery sam red rubber
catheters or even olive tips personally
I prefer to use a closed-ended Tomcat
followed by a five French red rubber
catheter when it comes to sedation for
the feline urethral obstruction pin the
sedative that you feel comfortable with
this is going to depend on the stability
of the cat in the rare feline you
reasonable obstruction cat that's
critically ill and comatose or obtunded
no sedation is necessary but the
majority of cases do need sedatives
my typical go-to drugs for sedation for
unblocking cats include four milligrams
of but--or phenol per cat ten milligrams
of ketamine per cat two point five
milligrams of diazepam per cat and
occasionally I'll top it off with ten to
twenty mix a propofol total per cat we
have an assistant helping us placing
this cat in dorsal recumbent C and in
this first technique an open Tomcat
catheter is used you can see a one cc
syringe is being used to help with hide
repulsion and ultimately this is
clinician preference I often will use a
20 cc to 60 cc syringe attached to an
extension set to help me flush the
urinary catheter in this technique we're
demonstrating with a closed and Tomcat
catheter and again using a syringe with
saline to help flush the most important
thing is when you're unblocking a cat
you have to be able to extrude the penis
and hold onto the prepuce so typically
I'll use my non-dominant hand use my
thumb and index finger and be able to
exert pressure so I
extrude the penis from the prepuce then
I'll introduce the Tomcat catheter into
the urethra approximately half to maybe
three-quarters of an inch so that the
holes of the urinary catheter are no
longer visible
once I've secured my catheter in place
in the tip of the penis I'll actually
pinch the prepuce skin gently between my
thumb and forefinger and pull the
prepuce caudally eventually while I'm
advancing the catheter in flushing
remember you have to apply a decent
amount of traction to the prepuce
because this is the pressure that helps
straighten the flexor in the cat's penis
and permits the catheter to pass over
the ischial arch once we flushed with
the Tomcat I'll actually aggressively
flush as I'm pulling the Tomcat out to
make sure that I flushed all that grit
or crystal or mucoid debris back into
the bladder I'll then advance a three
and a half French or a five French red
rubber catheter with a syringe attached
so I can flush as I'm going in the one
mistake I see is people flushing
excessively while the cat is just
starting to wake up once you get the red
rubber catheter in place make sure to
secure it in place with a Chinese finger
trap this is important to do while the
cat is sedate so again suture it in
immediately once you find that it's in
the proper location you can use two
techniques to see if your catheter is an
appropriate location I literally will
just use the wrapper from the red rubber
catheter to basically pre measure
outside on the body and make sure that
the urinary catheter is seated in an
appropriate location some people will
use the technique while they'll palpate
the bladder until urines coming out of
the red rubber catheter and some people
will verify with radiographs to evaluate
if the urinary catheter is too deep
remember we never want the urinary
catheter curling up on itself like you
can see in this video here another
important technique that we can often
offer our clients is to do an ultrasound
it's very very quick it's a great way of
evaluating for the presence of stones
crystals or debris within the bladder
and it's a very easy way for us to be
able to correct the catheter depth as
needed when in doubt these are patients
that
to be an aggressive IV fluids to help
treat their post obstructive diuresis
potential electrolyte monitoring pain
control or analgesia and symptomatic
supportive care and thankfully most of
these patients do well
[Music]
you